Filename: 213-remove-stream-sendmes.txt
Title: Remove stream-level sendmes from the design
Author: Roger Dingledine
Created: 4-Nov-2012
Status: Open

1. Motivation

  Tor uses circuit-level sendme cells to handle congestion / flow
  fairness at the circuit level, but it has a second stream-level
  flow/congestion/fairness layer under that to share a given circuit
  between multiple streams.

  The circuit-level flow control, or something like it, is needed
  because different users are competing for the same resources. But the
  stream-level flow control has a different threat model, since all the
  streams belong to the same user.

  When the circuit has only one active stream, the downsides are a)
  that we waste 2% of our bandwidth sending stream-level sendmes, and b)
  because of the circuit-level and stream-level window parameters we
  picked, we end up sending only half the cells we might otherwise send.

  When the circuit has two active streams, they each get to send 500
  cells for their window, because the circuit window is 1000. We still
  spend the 2% overhead.

  When the circuit has three or more active streams, they're all typically
  limited by the circuit window, since the stream-level window won't
  kick in. We still spend the 2% overhead though. And depending on their
  sending pattern, we could experience cases where a given stream might
  be able to send more data on the circuit, but it chooses not to because
  its stream-level window is empty.

  More generally, we don't have a good handle on the interactions between
  all the layers of congestion control in Tor. It would behoove us to
  simplify in the case where we're not clear on what it buys us.

2. Design

  We should strip all aspects of this stream-level flow control from
  the Tor design and code.

2.1. But doesn't having a lower stream window than circuit window save
     room for new streams?

  It could be that a feature of the stream window is that there's always
  space in the circuit window for another begin cell, so new streams
  will open faster than otherwise. But first, if there are two or more
  active streams going, there won't be any extra space. Second, since
  begin cells are client-to-exit, and typical circuits don't fill their
  outbound circuit windows very often anyway, and also since we're hoping
  to move to a world where we isolate more activities between circuits,
  I'm not inclined to worry much about losing this maybe-feature.

  See also proposal 168, "reduce default circuit window" -- it's
  interesting to note that proposal 168 was unknowingly dabbling in
  exactly this question, since reducing the default circuit window to
  500 or less made stream windows moot. It might be worth resurrecting
  the proposal 168 experiments once this proposal is implemented.

2.2. If we dump stream windows, we're effectively doubling them.

  Right now the circuit window starts at 1000, and the stream window
  starts at 500. So if we just rip out stream windows, we'll effectively
  change the stream window default to 1000, doubling the amount of data
  in flight and potentially clogging up the network more.

  We could either live with that, or we could change the default circuit
  window to 500 (which is easy to do even in a backward compatible way,
  since the edge connection can simply choose to not send as many cells).

3. Evaluation

  It would be wise to have some plan for making sure we didn't screw
  up the network too much with this change. The main trouble there is
  that torperf et al only do one stream at a time, so we really have no
  good baseline, or measurement tools, to capture network performance
  for multiple parallel streams.

  Maybe we should resolve task 7168 before the transition, so we're
  more prepared.

4. Transition

  Option one is to do a two-phase transition. In the first phase,
  edges stop enforcing the deliver window (i.e. stop closing circuits
  when the stream deliver goes negative, but otherwise they send and
  receive stream-level sendmes as now). In the second phase (once all
  old versions are gone), we can start disobeying the deliver window,
  and also stop sending stream-level sendmes back.

  That approach takes a while before it will matter. As an optimization,
  since clients can know which relay versions support the new behavior,
  we could have relays interpret violating the deliver window as signaling
  support for removed stream-level sendmes: the relay would then stop
  sending or expecting sendmes. That optimization is somewhat klunky
  though, first because web-browsing clients don't generally finish out
  a stream window in the upstream direction (so the klunky trick will
  probably never happen by accident), and second because if we lower
  the circuit window to 500 (see Sec 2.2), there's now no way to violate
  stream deliver windows.

  Option two is to introduce another relay cell type, which the client
  sends before opening any streams to let the other side know that
  it shouldn't use or expect stream-level sendmes. A variation here
  is to extend either the create cell or the begin cell (ha -- and they
  thought I was crazy when I included the explicit \0 at the end of the
  current begin cell payload), so we can specify our circuit preferences
  without any extra overhead.

  Option three is to wait until we switch to a new circuit protocol
  (e.g. when we move to ntor or ace), and use that as the signal to
  drop stream-level sendmes from the design. And hey, if we're lucky,
  by then we'll have sorted out the n23 questions (see ticket 4506)
  and we might be dumping circuit-level sendmes at that point too.

  Options two or three seem way better than option one.

  And since it's not super-urgent, I suggest we hold off on option two
  to see if option three makes sense.

