Filename: 225-strawman-shared-rand.txt
Title: Strawman proposal: commit-and-reveal shared rng
Author: Nick Mathewson
Created: 2013-11-29
Status: Draft

1. Introduction

  This is a strawman proposal: I don't think we should actually build
  it.  It's just a simple writeup of the more trivial commit-then-reveal
  protocol for generating a shared random value.  It's insecure to the
  extent that an adversary who controls b of the authorities gets to
  choose among 2^b outcomes for the result of the protocol.

  See proposal 224, section HASHRING for some motivation of why we want
  one of these in Tor.

  Let's do better!

  [TODO: Are we really stuck with Tor's nasty metaformat here?]

2. The protocol

  Here's a protocol for producing a shared random value. It should run
  less frequently than the directory consensus algorithm. It runs in
  these phases.

    1. COMMITMENT
    2. REVEAL
    3. COMPUTE SHARED RANDOM

  It should be implemented by software other than Tor, which should be
  okay for authorities.

  Note: This is not a great protocol. It has a number of failure
  modes. Better protocols seem hard to implement, though, and it ought
  to be possible to drop in a replacement here, if we do it right.

  At the start of phase 1, each participating authority publishes a
  statement of the form:

      shared-random 1
      shared-random-type commit
      signing-key-certification (certification here; see proposal 220)
      commitment-key-certification (certification here; see proposal 220)
      published YYYY-MM-DD HH:MM:SS
      period-start YYYY-MM-DD HH:MM:SS
      attempt INT
      commitment sha512 C
      signature (made with commitment key; see proposal 220)

  The signing key is the one used for consensus votes, signed by the
  directory authority identity key. The commitment key is used for this
  protocol only. The signature is made with the commitment key. The
  period-start value is the start of the period for which the shared
  random value should be in use. The attempt value starts at 1, and
  increments by 1 for each time that the protocol fails.

  The other fields should be self-explanatory.

  The commitment value C is a base64-encoded SHA-512 hash of a 256-bit
  random value R.

  During the rest of phase 1, every authority collects the commitments
  from other authorities, and publishes them to other authorities, as
  they do today with directory votes.

  At the start of phase 2, each participating authority publishes:

      shared-random 1
      shared-random-type reveal
      signing-key-certification (certification here; see proposal 220)
      commitment-key-certification (certification here; see proposal 220)
      received-commitment ID sig
      received-commitment ID sig
      published YYYY-MM-DD HH:MM:SS
      period-start YYYY-MM-DD HH:MM:SS
      attempt INT
      commitment sha512 C
      reveal R
      signature (made with commitment key; see proposal 220)

  The R value is the one used to generate C. The received-commitment
  lines are the signatures on the documents from other authorities in
  phase 1. All other fields are as in the commitments.

  During the rest of phase 2, every authority collects the
  reveals from other authorities, as above with commitments.

  At the start of phase 3, each participating authority either has a
  reveal from every authority that it received a commitment from, or it
  does not. Each participating authority then says

      shared-random 1
      shared-random-type finish
      signing-key-certification (certification here; see proposal 220)
      commitment-key-certification (certification here; see proposal 220)
      received-commitment ID sig R
      received-commitment ID sig R ...
      published YYYY-MM-DD HH:MM:SS
      period-start YYYY-MM-DD HH:MM:SS
      attempt INT
      consensus C
      signature (made with commitment key; see proposal 220)

  Where C = SHA256(ID | R | ID | R | ID | R | ...) where the ID
  values appear in ascending order and the R values appear after
  their corresponding ID values.

  See [SHAREDRANDOM-REFS] for more discussion here.

  (TODO: should this be its own spec?  If so, does it have to use our
  regular metaformat or can it use something less sucky?)
