Filename: 274-rotate-onion-keys-less.txt
Title: Rotate onion keys less frequently.
Author: Nick Mathewson
Created: 20-Feb-2017
Status: Finished
Implemented-In: 0.3.1.1-alpha

1. Overview

   This document proposes that, in order to limit the bandwidth needed
   for microdescriptor listing and transmission, we reduce the onion key
   rotation rate from the current value (7 days) to something closer to
   28 days.

   Doing this will reduce the total microdescriptor download volume
   by approximately 70%.

2. Motivation

   Currently, clients must download a networkstatus consensus document
   once an hour, and must download every unfamiliar microdescriptor
   listed in that document.  Therefore, we can reduce client directory
   bandwidth if we can cause microdescriptors to change less often.

   Furthermore, we are planning (in proposal 140) to implement a
   diff-based mechanism for clients to download only the parts of each
   consensus that have changed.  If we do that, then by having the
   microdescriptor for each router change less often, we can make these
   consensus diffs smaller as well.

3. Analysis

   I analyzed microdescriptor changes over the month of January
   2017, and found that 94.5% of all microdescriptor transitions
   were changes in onion key alone.

   Therefore, we could reduce the number of changed "m" lines in
   consensus diffs by approximately 94.5% * (3/4) =~ 70%,
   if we were to rotate onion keys one-fourth as often.

   The number of microdescriptors to actually download should
   decrease by a similar number.

   This amount to a significant reduction: currently, by
   back-of-the-envelope estimates, an always-on client that downloads
   all the directory info in a month downloads about 449MB of compressed
   consensuses and something around 97 MB of compressed
   microdescriptors.  This proposal would save that user about 12% of
   their total directory bandwidth.

   If we assume that consensus diffs are implemented (see proposal 140),
   then the user's compressed consensus downloads fall to something
   closer to 27 MB.  Under that analysis, the microdescriptors will
   dominate again at 97 MB -- so lowering the number of microdescriptors
   to fetch would save more like 55% of the remaining bandwidth.

   [Back-of-the-envelope technique: assume every consensus is
   downloaded, and every microdesc is downloaded, and microdescs are
   downloaded in groups of 61, which works out to a constant rate.]

   We'll need to do more analysis to assess the impact on clients that
   connect to the network infrequently enough to miss microdescriptors:
   nonetheless, the 70% figure above ought to apply to clients that connect
   at least weekly.

   (XXXX Better results pending feedback from ahf's analysis.)

4. Security analysis

   The onion key is used to authenticate a relay to a client when the
   client is building a circuit through that relay.  The only reason to
   limit their lifetime is to limit the impact if an attacker steals an
   onion key without being detected.

   If an attacker steals an onion key and is detected, the relay can
   issue a new onion key ahead of schedule, with little disruption.

   But if the onion key theft is _not_ detected, then the attacker
   can use that onion key to impersonate the relay until clients
   start using the relay's next key.  In order to do so, the
   attacker must also impersonate the target relay at the link
   layer: either by stealing the relay's link keys, which rotate
   more frequently, or by compromising the previous relay in the
   circuit.

   Therefore, onion key rotation provides a small amount of
   protection only against an attacker who can compromise relay keys
   very intermittently, and who controls only a small portion of the
   network.  Against an attacker who can steal keys regularly it
   does little, and an attacker who controls a lot of the network
   can already mount other attacks.

5. Proposal

   I propose that we move the default onion key rotation interval
   from 7 days to 28 days, as follows.

   There should be a new consensus parameter, "onion-key-rotation-days",
   measuring the key lifetime in days.  Its minimum should be 1, its
   maximum should be 90, and its default should be 28.

   There should also be a new consensus parameter,
   "onion-key-grace-period-days", measuring the interval for which
   older onion keys should still be accepted.  Its minimum should be
   1, its maximum should be onion-key-rotation-days, and its default
   should be 7.

   Every relay should list each onion key it generates for
   onion-key-rotation-days days after generating it, and then
   replace it.  Relays should continue to accept their most recent
   previous onion key for an additional onion-key-grace-period-days
   days after it is replaced.

