Filename: 306-ipv6-happy-eyeballs.txt
Title: A Tor Implementation of IPv6 Happy Eyeballs
Author: Neel Chauhan
Created: 25-Jun-2019
Supercedes: 299
Status: Open
Ticket: https://trac.torproject.org/projects/tor/ticket/29801

1. Introduction

   As IPv4 address space becomes scarce, ISPs and organizations will deploy
   IPv6 in their networks. Right now, Tor clients connect to entry nodes using
   IPv4 connectivity by default.

   When networks first transition to IPv6, both IPv4 and IPv6 will be enabled
   on most networks in a so-called "dual-stack" configuration. This is to not
   break existing IPv4-only applications while enabling IPv6 connectivity.
   However, IPv6 connectivity may be unreliable and clients should be able
   to connect to the entry node using the most reliable technology, whether
   IPv4 or IPv6.

   In ticket #27490, we introduced the option ClientAutoIPv6ORPort which
   lets a client randomly choose between IPv4 or IPv6. However, this
   random decision does not take into account unreliable connectivity
   or falling back to the competing IP version should one be unreliable
   or unavailable.

   One way to select between IPv4 and IPv6 on a dual-stack network is a
   so-called "Happy Eyeballs" algorithm as per RFC 8305. In one, a client
   attempts the preferred IP family, whether IPv4 or IPv6. Should it work,
   the client sticks with the preferred IP family. Otherwise, the client
   attempts the alternate version. This means if a dual-stack client has
   both IPv4 and IPv6, and IPv6 is unreliable, preferred or not, the
   client uses IPv4, and vice versa. However, if IPv4 and IPv6 are both
   equally reliable, and IPv6 is preferred, we use IPv6.

   In Proposal 299, we have attempted a IP fallback mechanism using failure
   counters and preferring IPv4 and IPv6 based on the state of the counters.
   However, Prop299 was not standard Happy Eyeballs and an alternative,
   standards-compliant proposal was requested in [P299-TRAC] to avoid issues
   from complexity caused by randomness.

   This proposal describes a Tor implementation of Happy Eyeballs and is
   intended as a successor to Proposal 299.

2. Address/Relay Selection

   This section describes the necessary changes for address selection to
   implement Prop306.

2.1. Address Handling Changes

   To be able to handle Happy Eyeballs in Tor, we will need to modify the
   data structures used for connections to entry nodes, namely the extend info
   structure.

   Entry nodes are usually guards, but some clients don't use guards:

     * bootstrapping clients can connect to fallback directory mirrors or
       authorities,

     * v3 single onion services can use IPv4 or IPv6 addresses to connect
       to introduction and rendezvous points, and

     * clients can be configured to disable entry guards.

   Bridges are out of scope for this proposal, because Tor does not support
   multiple IP addresses in a single bridge line.

   The extend info structure should contain both an IPv4 and an IPv6 address.
   This will allow us to try IPv4 and the IPv6 addresses should both be
   available on a relay and the client is dual-stack.

   When parsing relay descriptors and filling in the extend info data
   structure, we need to fill in both the IPv4 and IPv6 address if they both
   are available. If only one family is available for a relay (IPv4 or IPv6),
   we should fill in the address for preferred family and leave the alternate
   family null.

2.2. Guard Selection Changes

   In Proposal 283, we have allowed microdescriptor consensus documents
   to contain IPv6 addresses. Most clients download microdescriptor
   consensuses, Prop283 makes it possible to implement Prop306.

   When we select candidates for the entry node, we should have a consensus
   parameter for the number of entry guards. The parameter is as follows:

     * NumIPv6Guards NUM

   If UseEntryGuards is set to 1, we will try to pick NUM routers that support
   IPv6 for our primary guard list, which is the set of routers we strongly
   prefer when connecting to the Tor network. If NUM is 0, we try to learn the
   number from the guard-n-primary-guards-ipv6 consensus parameter, and default
   to 1 if the consensus parameter isn’t set.

   The default value for NumIPv6Guards should be 0.

3. Relay Connections

   If there is an existing authenticated connection, we must use it similar
   to how we used it pre-Prop306.

   If there is no existing authenticated connection for an entry node, we
   must attempt to connect using the first available, allowed, and preferred
   address.

   We should also allow falling back to the alternate address. For this,
   three alternate designs will be given.

3.1. Proposed Designs

   This subsection will have three proposed designs for connecting to relays
   via IPv4 and IPv6 in a Tor implementation of Happy Eyeballs.

   These proposed designs will have some tradeoffs, including:

    * Launching multiple TCP connections places up to 2x extra socket load on
      dual-stack relays and authorities, because both connections may succeed.

    * Launching multiple TLS connections places up to 2x the CPU load on
      dual-stack relays and authorities, because both connections may succeed.

    * Increasing the delay between connections mitigates the above issues,
      but reduces perceived performance, particularly at bootstrap time
      (pre-emptive circuits hide these delays after bootstrap).

   The preferred designs are is listed below:

    * Section 3.1.1: TCP Connection to Preferred Address On First TCP Success

   Alternative Happy Eyeballs designs will be in the following sections in the
   Appendix:

    * Section A.1.1: First Successful Authentication

    * Section A.1.2: TCP Connection to Preferred Address On First Authenticated
      Connection

3.1.1. TCP Connection to Preferred Address On First TCP Success

   In this design, we will connect via TCP to the first preferred address.
   On a failure or after a 250 ms delay, we attempt to connect via TCP to
   the alternate address. On a success, Tor attempts to authenticate and
   closes the other connection.

   This design is the closest to RFC 8305 and is similar to how Happy
   Eyeballs is implemented in a web browser.

3.2. Recommendations for Implementation of Section 3.1 Proposals

   We should start with implementing and testing the design as described in
   Section 3.1.1. If desired, we could also implement and test the Section
   A.1.1 and A.1.2 designs.

3.3. Handling Connection Successes And Failures

   Should a connection to a entry node succeed and is authenticated via TLS,
   we can then use the connection. In this case, we should cancel all other
   connection timers and in-progress connections. Cancelling the timers is
   necessary so we don't attempt new unnecessary connections when our
   existing connection is successful, preventing denial-of-service risks.

   However, if we fail all available and allowed connections, we should tell
   the rest of Tor that the connection has failed. This is so we can attempt
   another entry node.

3.4. Connection Attempt Delays

   As mentioned in [TEOR-P306-REP], initially, clients should prefer IPv4
   by default. The Connection Attempt Delay, or delay between IPv4 and IPv6
   connections should be 1.5 seconds. This is to avoid the overhead from
   tunneled IPv6 connections.

   The Minimum Connection Attempt Delay should not be dynamically adjusted
   as it adds privacy risks. This value should be fixed at 10 ms as per
   RFC 8305 and could be adjusted using this proposed consensus parameter:

     * ConnectionAttemptDelay N msec

   Where N is the number of milliseconds for the network-wide Minimum
   Connection Attempt Delay.

   The Maximum Connection Attempt Delay should also not be dynamically adjusted
   for privacy reasons, but the maximum should be higher than the RFC 8305
   recommendation of 2 seconds. For Tor, we should make this timeout value 30
   seconds to match Tor's existing timeout.

   We should also make it possible for users to set the Maximum Connection
   Attempt value higher for slower and higher-latency networks such as dial-up
   and satellite.

4. Option Changes

   As we enable IPv6-enabled clients to connect out of the box, we should
   adjust the default options to enable IPv6 while not breaking IPv4-only
   clients.

4.1. New Default Options for Prop306

   The new default options should be:

    * ClientUseIPv4 as 1 (to enable IPv4)

    * ClientUseIPv6 as 1 (to enable IPv6)

    * ClientPreferIPv6ORPort as 0 (for load-balancing reasons so we don't
      overload IPv6-only guards)

    * ConnectionAttemptDelay 10 (for 10 msec, the minimum delay between
      IPv4 and IPv6)

   One thing to note is that clients should be able to connect with the above
   options on IPv4-only, dual-stack, and IPv6-only networks, and they should
   also work if ClientPreferIPv6ORPort is 1. This means we shouldn't expect
   IPv4 or IPv6 to work if ClientUseIPv4 or ClientUseIPv6 is set.

   When the majority of clients are IPv6-capable, we could set the default
   value of ClientPreferIPv6ORPort to 1 in order to take advantage of IPv6.

4.2. Prop306 Consensus Parameters

   We could have the following consensus parameters:

    * ClientUseIPv6

    * ClientPreferIPv6ORPort (when most of the guards have IPv6 and it is fast)

   Should we have the consenus parameters, the values for these options should
   be set to the values of the similarly-named options as described in Section
   4.1 including the consideration for ClientPreferIPv6ORPort.

5. Statistics

5.1. Relay Statistics

   Relays could measure the number of successful IPv4 and IPv6 connections.
   We could also send this information to directory authorities.

   However, should we implement Section 5.1, we should consider the privacy
   implications of these statistics, and whether they should be public or not.

5.2. Client Heartbeat Messages

   In a Tor session, we should count the number of IPv4 and IPv6 connections
   to ORPorts, and distinguish between authenticated (relay, authority
   reachability) and unauthenticated (client, bridge) connections. These
   statistics should be included in the Heartbeat logs.

6. Deploying Prop306

   This section describes the information necessary for deployment of Prop306
   on Tor clients and in Tor Browser.

6.1. Initial Feasibility Testing

   We should test this proposal with the following scenarios:

    * Different combinations of values for the options ClientUseIPv4,
      ClientUseIPv6, and ClientPreferIPv6ORPort on IPv4-only, IPv6-only,
      and dual-stack connections

    * Dual-stack connections of different technologies, including high-bandwidth
      and low-latency (e.g. fiber), moderate-bandwidth and moderate-latency
      (e.g. DSL, LTE), and high-latency and low-bandwidth (e.g. satellite,
      dial-up) to see if Prop306 is reliable and feasible

6.2. Minimum Viable Prop306 Product

   The mimumum viable product for Prop306 must include the following:

    * Implementation of one of the algorithms in Section 3.1 along with the
      changes described in Sections 2.1 and 2.2

    * The Connection Success/Failure mechanism in Section 3.3 and Connection
      Delay mechanism in Section 3.4 (the consensus parameter is optional)

    * A default setup capable of both IPv4 and IPv6 connections with the
      options described in Section 4.1

6.3. Optional Features

   Some features which are optional include:

    * Consensus Parameter ConnectionAttemptDelay (Section 3.4) - We will need
      this if the Minimum Connection Attempt Delay needs to be dynamically
      adjusted

    * Consensus Parameters ClientUseIPv6 (Section 4.2), and
      ClientPreferIPv6ORPort (Section 4.2) - We will need this if we desire
      the ability for clients to prefer IPv6 when the majority of clients
      and relays are IPv6-capable without changing the configuration

    * Prop306 Statistics (Section 5) - While optional, this may be useful for
      debugging and reliability testing, and metrics on IPv4 vs. IPv6

7. Acknowledgments

   Thank you so much to teor for the discussion of the happy eyeballs proposal.
   I wouldn't have been able to do this has it not been for your help.

8. Refrences

   [P299-TRAC]: https://trac.torproject.org/projects/tor/ticket/29801

   [TEOR-P306-REP]: https://lists.torproject.org/pipermail/tor-dev/2019-July/013919.html

A. Appendix

A.1. Alternative Happy Eyeballs Designs

A.1.1. First Successful Authentication

   In this design, Tor will first connect to the preferred address and
   attempt to authenticate. After a 250 ms second delay (based on the RFC
   8305 defaults), Tor will connect to the alternate address and try to
   authenticate. On the first successful authenticated connection, we
   close the other connection.

   This design places the least connection load on the network, but might
   add extra TLS load.

A.1.2. TCP Connection to Preferred Address On First Authenticated Connection

   This design attempts a TCP connection to a preferred address. On a failure
   or a 1.5 second delay, we try the alternative address.

   On the first successful TCP connection Tor attempts to authenticate
   immediately. On the first authentication success, Tor closes the other
   connection.

   This design is the most reliable for clients, but increases the connection
   load on dual-stack entry nodes and authorities. For instance, this can be
   used to amplify a DoS attack on the Tor network.


