Title: Faster Headless Consensus Bootstrapping
Author: Mike Perry
Created: 01-10-2012
Status: Open
Target: 0.2.4.x+


Overview and Motiviation

 This proposal describes a way for clients to fetch the initial
 consensus more quickly in situations where some or all of the directory
 authorities are unreachable. This proposal is meant to describe a
 solution for bug #4483.

Design: Bootstrap Process Changes

 The core idea is to attempt to establish bootstrap connections in
 parallel during the bootstrap process, and download the consensus from
 the first connection that completes.

 Connection attempts will be done in batches of three. Only one
 connection will be performed to one of the canonical directory
 authorities. Two connections will be performed to randomly chosen hard
 coded directory mirrors.

 If no connections complete within 5 seconds, another batch of three
 connections will be launched. Otherwise, the first connection to
 complete will be used to download the consensus document and the others
 will be closed, after which bootstrapping will proceed as normal.

 If at any time, the total outstanding bootstrap connection attempts
 exceeds 15, no new connection attempts are to be launched until existing
 connection attempts experience full timeout.

Design: Fallback Dir Mirror Selection

 The set of hard coded directory mirrors from #572 shall be chosen using
 the 100 Guard nodes with the longest uptime.

 The fallback weights will be set using each mirror's fraction of
 consensus bandwidth out of the total of all 100 mirrors.

 This list of fallback dir mirrors should be updated with every
 major Tor release. In future releases, the number of dir mirrors
 should be set at 20% of the current Guard nodes, rather than fixed at
 100.

Performance: Additional Load with Current Parameter Choices

 This design and the connection count parameters were chosen such that
 no additional bandwidth load would be placed on the directory
 authorities. In fact, the directory authorities should experience less
 load, because they will not need to serve the consensus document for a
 connection in the event that one of the directory mirrors complete their
 connection before the directory authority does.

 However, the scheme does place additional TLS connection load on the
 fallback dir mirrors. Because bootstrapping is rare and all but one of 
 the TLS connections will be very short-lived and unused, this should not
 be a substantial issue.

 The dangerous case is in the event of a prolonged consensus failure
 that induces all clients to enter into the bootstrap process. In this
 case, the number of initial TLS connections to the fallback dir mirrors
 would be 2*C/100, or 10,000 for C=500,000 users. If no connections
 complete before the five retries, this could reach as high as 50,000
 connection attempts, but this is extremely unlikely to happen in full
 aggregate.

 However, in the no-consensus scenario today, the directory authorities
 would already experience C/9 or 55,555 connection attempts. The
 5-retry scheme increases their total maximum load to about 275,000
 connection attempts, but again this is unlikely to be reached
 in aggregate. Additionally, with this scheme, even if the dirauths
 are taken down by this load, the dir mirrors should be able to survive
 it.

Implementation Notes: Code Modifications

 The implementation of the bootstrap process is unfortunately mixed 
 in with many types of directory activity.

 The process starts in update_consensus_networkstatus_downloads(),
 which initiates a single directory connection through
 directory_get_from_dirserver(). Depending on bootstrap state,
 a single directory server is selected and a connection is
 eventually made through directory_initiate_command_rend().

 There appear to be a few options for altering this code to perform
 multiple connections. Without refactoring, one approach would be
 to make multiple calls to directory_initiate_command_routerstatus()
 from directory_get_from_dirserver() if the purpose is
 DIR_PURPOSE_FETCH_CONSENSUS and the only directory servers available
 are the authorities and the fallback dir mirrors.

 The code in directory_initiate_command_rend() would then need to be
 altered to maintain a list of the dircons created for this purpose as
 well as avoid immediately queuing the directory_send_command() request
 for the DIR_PURPOSE_FETCH_CONSENSUS purpose. A flag would need to be set
 on the dircon to be checked in connection_dir_finished_connecting().

 The function connection_dir_finished_connecting() would need to be
 altered to examine the list of pending dircons, determine if this one is
 the first to complete, and if so, then call directory_send_command() to
 download the consensus and close the other pending dircons.

 An additional timer would need to be installed to re-call
 update_consensus_networkstatus_downloads() or a related helper after 5
 seconds. connection_dir_finished_connecting() would cancel this timer.
 The helper would check the list of pending connections and ensure it
 never exceeds 15.

